If you research closures online you
will inevitably run across this
example as far as why closures can make
your code look hard to anticipate, but it
actually really isn't that true when you
understand what's going on under the hood.
So we're going to pull up this example,
we'll write it out,
then we'll examine it, and see if we
can't have a clear understanding,
a clear expectation of what's going
to happen when this code is run.
All right, so I'm going to go ahead and
write a new function
called build functions.
And I'm going to create an empty array,
remember that's array literal syntax,
I'm just creating an empty array and
a for loop.
I'm gonna create a variable I,
which is my counter.
As long as it's less
than 3 I'll keep going.
So, I'll do this 3 times,
and then I have my for loop.
Inside my for loop, I'm going to
add something to the array, and
in JavaScript I can use .push,
and that just means,
add this thing I'm about to put inside
these parentheses to the array.
And what I'm going to put
inside the array is a function.
Remember, arrays are functions
of anything and that is that
arrays are collections of anything, so
I can put functions inside of them.
So my function that's going to be put
inside my array is just going to output I,
which is up here up at scope chain,
its outer reference.
So, I'm going to do that three times.
I'm going to add three new function
objects using these function expressions,
to an array.
So, when this is done,
I'll have three functions inside my array.
Equivalent functions, identical functions,
but three different functions,
and this function will
just return that array.
Got it?
All right, so now that we have this,
we see what's going on.
I'll just scroll down a bit here, and
I'm going to get that array
by calling buildfunctions.
So now I have my array in this variable.
And then, remember that these
are functions inside the array, so
I can reference an item, an element
inside the array, the first one,
in this case, and then I'll call it.
And I'm going to do this for all three
functions that are put inside the array
via that for loop, so
let me just back this out a little bit.
Take a good look.
What do you expect this console.log to
output in each of these three cases?
It's outputting i.
Now, you need to remember that
this isn't invoking the function,
it's just creating it.
The function is invoked here, and
then the other function here, and
the other function here.
So, these functions that are being
created here are being invoked down here,
this is just creating them and
putting them in the array.
So, when this function is actually
invoked and it looks at I, and
it looks at its outer reference,
what will I be?
All right so this is one of those
things that tends to surprise people.
When you look at this code,
what you might expect is to see 0, 1, 2.
Is that what you expected?
Or are you expecting something else?
Let's look.
Refresh, I got all threes.
Are you surprised by that?
Why would in every case,
when it looks for i and
goes out to the outer reference,
why would it find a three in all cases?
Well, maybe you've figured this out,
but let's go ahead and
take a good look at what's
happening under the hood.
So here's our code again.
We have buildFunctions that is pushing
these functions into this array,
and then we call those
functions at the bottom.
So we have an array of three
functions at the end of this, and
each of them console.log's the value of i.
And when we ran this, everyone of
those function calls logged three.
So why?
Well, how does the execution stack
look like as this is happening?
Well, the global Execution Context
is always there at the bottom and
it contains the build functions, and
this variable we just called fs.
And so, we hit this line where
it executes buildFunctions().
So, when buildFunctions() executes or
is invoked,
we get an execution context,
and it has two variables, i,
which was created on this for loop, and
arr, which we declared at
the beginning of the function.
But what are the values
of those two variables
by the time we hit the return statement?
Well, the for loop runs, and so,
i is at first 0, and
it pushes the function into the array,
it adds this new function
to the array right here.
But realize that console.log
isn't being executed right here,
and that's where a lot
of people get confused.
But, we already understand
function expressions.
That all that's happening here is I'm
creating a new function object and
putting that line of code
into it's code property.
But it isn't actually running,
it's just creating that object.
I haven't invoked the function.
So it continues, i becomes a 1,
because of the i++.
It adds another function
object into the array,
looks identical but
it's a separate function object.
Then i becomes 2 because of the i++,
and we get a third function
pushed into the array.
Then the i++ is run again, and i is 3, and
the engine sees that i is
less than 3 expression,
and says oh, i is no longer less than 3,
and leaves the for loop.
That's how for loops work,
the i, that variable,
now is larger than my statement
of when to leave the for loop,
so since that's now false,
I leave the for loop,
but realize that i, its last value
when i leave that for loop is now a 3.
That's what told me to leave the for loop.
So when i hit this return arr,
what's in memory
in that execution context,
is that i is a 3,
an array, that arr, holds 3 functions.
We'll just call them f0, f1,
f2, but they're anonymous.
So then, we go back to the global
execution context, and
this buildFunctions execution
context is popped off the stack.
But what have we learned before?
What's in memory is still hanging around.
So now we hit this first function
call where I take the first element
in the array, which is a function,
and execute it.
The code in the code
property is council.log(i),
so its execution context is created.
There is no variable i inside of its code,
so it goes up the scope chain.
It goes to its outer reference.
Where was it created?
Inside build functions, and
what is inside the memory
that used to be in the build
functions execution context.
I is 3.
So it says, all right,
console.log3, and then it finishes.
We move on to the next function,
the next one inside the array,
and an execution context is created, but
that one has the same outer
environment reference,
because it was created in the same
place as the first function.
Physically it's sitting in the same spot,
inside the same build function.
So its outer environment reference,
because of its position
physically in the code,
because of it's left position, is to
the same spot in memory as the first one.
And so when it looks for i,
it looks at that same spot in memory,
where the build functions held
its variables, and sees a three.
So console.log(i) results in a three, and
the same thing for the third function,
they all point at the same memory
spot going up the scope chain
because they were all created inside
the same function, buildFunctions.
So all three of these have
the same parent so to speak.
This would be like three children and
you ask them how old is their father.
They're not gonna tell you how old their
father was when each of them was born.
They're each gonna give you the same
answer, how old their father is now.
In the same way, we have three functions
that are being executed later,
so when we execute the function,
it's only going to be able to tell you
what the value is in memory of its parent
context of that outer
environment reference.
It's only going to be able to tell
you what's in memory right now,
not at the time that we
created the function.
Only right now when we're
actually executing the function.
And so all three output the same thing
because all three are pointing
to that same location in memory.
We're doing exactly what we're
telling the JavaScript engine to do.
At first glance, this may look weird,
but as soon as you realize that,
that console.log isn't executed
right there where it's sitting, but
executed when we invoke these functions.
When we look behind the scenes instead
of looking at purely what we're
writing in the code, this makes sense,
it makes total sense.
The value of I is what it is at
the moment that I execute the function.
Makes sense?
Look at this, look at the code yourself,
write the code out, think about it.
This example that you see all over
the internet isn't really that tough
if you really stop and
ponder it just for a bit.
I is three by the time you
call all these functions, and
so that's what they're going to output.
Got that?
All right, moving on.
We've seen that first class functions
plus this language feature of closures,
where when I execute the function it
still has access to the outer variables.
By the way,
these are also called free variables.
A free variable is a variable
that is outside a function, but
that you have access to.
So it closes in,
it wraps up these variables, and
at the point of execution,
all three of these functions,
because they're sitting in the same spot,
are going to be
pointing to the same memory space where
these outer variables were located.
And you might ask the question,
well what if I did want this to work?
What if I did want this to do
what I just said, to output zero,
then a one, then a two?
Well there's a couple
ways to approach that.
Let's just move ourselves down a bit.
And we'll call this buildFunctions2,
and fs2, just so
we'll have them separate
in the same code here.
And I'll call it buildFunctions2.
All right, what's coming to JavaScript
with esx is that let variable,
remember we said that.
So I could do something like this,
in console.log j.
What happens here will be that
the let variable that's created,
is scoped to the block, so,
inside these curly braces.
So every time the four loop runs,
this will be a new variable in memory.
And it will be segmented in the side
of memory of this execution context so
that when this function is called,
it would be pointing each time
at a different spot within that memory.
These are subsegmented essentially
as separately scoped variables.
So new JavaScript functionality lets us do
it this way, however how could we do it
with the ES5 that is the current
version of JavaScript functionality.
Well, in order to preserve
the value of i for
this function I'm going to
need a separate execution
context for each of the functions
that I'm pushing into the array.
I need a parent scope that holds
the current value of I as the loop goes.
So, the only way to get an execution
context is to execute a function.
So, how can I execute
a function on the fly?
Do you remember?
An immediately invoked function expression
is a nice, clean way to do that.
So I can make a function.
Let's say I give it a variable j.
I'm going to create it and
then execute it, and give it i.
So, now I have an immediately
invoked function expression.
See that?
I had an extra parenthesis there.
I'm going to put this
inside Either one is valid.
And so now I have a function,
and I'm passing i.
So what's going to happen?
Well every time the loop runs,
it's going to execute this function,
passing 0, then it's going to
execute a new one, passing 1,
then it's gonna execute a new one,
passing 2,
and each of those executions creates
its own execution context, and
j will be stored in each of
those three execution contexts.
So I'll have j as zero, and another
execution context where j is one, and
a different execution
context where j is two.
And even though those execution contexts
will go away after this line is run,
we know thanks to closures,
that J, all those three Js for
those three different execution
contexts will be hanging out.
So I can just return function,
console.log(j).
Whoa, that's kinda crazy right?
But look, we're doing a push and
this push is going to push the result
of executing this function
and executing this function
gives us back a function.
See that?
I'm pushing the result of this
function and when this function runs,
it gives me this so
that's what get's pushed into the array.
Then when this gets executed,
and it looks for j,
it doesn't need to go all the way
out up into this for loop.
It'll just go out to
this execution context.
j will store the value at that
moment it was executed in the loop.
So I should see what I originally
thought I was going to see,
and there it is 0, 1, 2.
So that's a way to use
closures to our advantage
to make sure that we have the values
that we need when we execute this
inner most function later on down
here at the bottom of our code.
So, take a good look at this code.
Make sure that you understand it.
We're using all of these things that we've
learned up to this point when it comes to
first class functions, closures,
and all of these ideas.
If you get this,
you're understanding the fundamental
aspect of advanced JavaScript programming.
And function closures can
be useful in other ways.
All right, let's move on.